The Computerization of Mobile Devices
Mobile technology, as with computers in general, has become more affordable even for those of us working in the nonprofit and library sectors. Unlike computers however, you don't necessarily get to do more things faster; your voice calls don't getting clearer, and your text messages don't get delivered faster. If anything, due to the increasing load, the performance of those basic functions may even have degraded. Still, like computers, mobile devices have moved from small monochrome screens to large color ones, and from ten-key pads to full thumbpads or touchscreens. This advance in technology is offering new ways of interaction and productivity in the workplace.

Just like computers, mobile phones and tablets need operating systems to power these devices. Here are the three most popular smartphone operating systems based on new smartphones sold:

Android: Developed by Google and in its second major version, Android can be found in devices made by a variety of manufacturers.
iOS: Developed by Apple and in its fourth major version, it runs on iPhones, iPad tablets, and iPod touch music devices.
Blackberry OS: Developed by Research in Motion and in its sixth major version, it runs on the eponymous devices favored by many corporate IT departments.
Although many would argue that one brand/OS/device is better than another it should solely depend on your own needs and preferences. While the number of "apps" (more on this later) or programs that run on mobile devices is often used as a selling point, if an app is functional and well supported, it would be made for more than just one platform. Other differentiators include the presence a keyboard, size and weight, and the user friendliness of the main interface. And a phone is only as good as its voice and data service offered, so reviewing the plans and service reliability in your area should also play a role in your decision. Read on for more on networks.

In addition to smartphones, larger devices with touchscreens seven inches and larger are entering the market. Popularized by Apple's iPad, tablets like the Samsung Tablet running Android or RIM's Playbook are being heralded as the advent of a new computing trend. Although for now they are used mostly as content consumption devices, (you wouldn't want to compose your grant report on an iPad), you can certainly view and comment on it adequately on-the-go. Because of their increased screen size, many enterprises are embracing tablets as a legitimate productivity tool in addition to a laptop or mobile phone, sometimes merely as devices to connect to full-fledged virtual machines and servers. As more devices come out in the future we can expect to find more ways to use them.