How technology impacts the game
Google ClassroomFacebookTwitter
Email
This content is provided by the 49ers Museum Education Program.
Introduction
At the start of the 20th century, football was just beginning to gain popularity as a college sport. Fans could only experience the game by attending in person, catching the highlights through newspaper articles or by word of mouth. Today, technology saturates our lives, and we can now watch, listen, download, stream, record, playback, and project all aspects of the game through innovations made in technology. Advances in technology have dramatically influenced the game, the way it is played, and have helped to make professional football become America’s most popular pastime.
Definition of technology
Throughout human history, many creative people have made an incredible array of technological advances that make our lives more convenient--from machinery to new medicines and from communication devices to hardware. Technology has given us the ability to live longer, healthier, easier and more enjoyable lives and has irreversibly changed the landscape of professional football.
Before we can dive into how technology has changed the game of football, we must first understand what technology is. The word technology is widely used throughout our society; however, the actual meaning of the word is really not that well-known. Technology is frequently associated with gadgetry and gizmos (i.e., cell phones, hand-held game systems, personal computers, etc.) that either entertain or perform a useful function.
However, technology is truly defined as the purposeful application of information in the design, creation and utilization of products and services, and can be generally found in the organization of human-made activities. The word technology originates from two Greek words, techne and logos. Techne is defined as an art, craft, skill, or the manner by which something is gained. Logos is defined as a word, the means by which inward thought is expressed. Basically, technology means words, discussions and thoughts about the way things are developed or gained.
Technology can work hand-in-hand with different subjects (like science and math) to accomplish a specific task or solve a particular problem. For example, because football is a highly physical game, players in the past were susceptible to head and facial injuries because they didn’t have adequate head protection to discourage such injuries. Thankfully, major advancements in the study of material science allowed for new helmet and face mask technologies to be created .
The role and impact of technology in our lives is ever expanding. Understanding how technology is shaped by innovative minds and how technology shapes people's interactions with each other is important, not only for those who study, formulate and implement new technologies, but also for all people and organizations (like professional football) that use such technologies.
Types of technology
We apply technology in almost everything we do in our lives. We use technology at school, at work, for play, for communication, transportation, compiling data, and so much more. Technology can be complex or very simple. As a result of this, there are many types of technologies.
One type of technology that is widely researched in professional football is materials technology, which includes using materials like metal and plastic to develop safer equipment. Football also makes use of electronic technology, industrial technology, medical technology and communications technology.
Advancement of technology in football
Over the years, a handful of technologies have had a direct and drastic impact on professional football. Technologies such as on-screen graphics, High-Definition (HD) coverage and surround sound have allowed professional football fans to realistically experience the game from the comfort of their own homes. On-the-field technologies have had an equal if not greater effect on nearly every aspect of 49ers games. Technology has had an impact in play-calling, communication, and the drafting of potential players, to name just a few. Below are various examples of how technology has changed the game.
Wireless headsets
One type of technology that we're probably most familiar with today is electronic technology, which is a complex form of technology that uses electric circuits to accomplish a specific goal. Anything that runs on electricity -- like computers, smart phones, and even wireless headsets -- is called electronic. A headset is a headphone or pair of headphones, usually equipped with a microphone, that allows for two-way communication. 49ers coaches and coordinators started using headsets in 1994, but miscommunications often still occurred during games. This forced coaches to revert back to using hand signals to communicate plays to their quarterbacks from the sidelines. In 2012, professional football ended these sideline technical difficulties by implementing new technology that allowed all teams to switch from the problematic analog headsets (which sent communication through wires or cables) to digital wireless headsets.
Wireless technology is when electromagnetic waves carry signals of information without the help of wires, cables or other electrical means. In a game where communication is key, wireless technology brings more strategy to the logistics and speed of how the game is played and has made communication on the field more reliable. One of the advantages of new technology at Levi’s® Stadium is the diminishing need for cords and wires. Wireless technologies are all based on the same idea, with a few small differences. Information is relayed wirelessly using various types of signals from one point to another. Some communicate over long distances, while others over short distances.
[Where can I learn more about wireless technology?]
Wireless technology is dramatically reshaping the 49ers fan experience at Levi’s® Stadium. For example, while you’re in the stadium, you can connect to its wireless network using your smartphone or tablet to watch the game via any of the many 4K (high-resolution) video cameras installed throughout the facility. Fans can pick from multiple points of view, watch close-ups of the plays, or watch a live wireless broadcast during the game on their smartphones. Wireless technology will also help fans find food choices within the stadium or potentially connect with other fans via social media. Fans have the option of getting digital or paper tickets, and can even get directions to help find the best travel route to and from the game.

Tablet revolution
A tablet is a portable personal computer that is equipped with a touch screen interface, and has unique graphics, applications, games, and other programs. Because of their small size, they are extremely portable and can be easily stowed in a backpack. 49ers coaches are outfitted with tablets during games, which allow them to manage team strategy and access opponent data, statistics, calendars and rosters, all on a wireless system. The 49ers have transitioned everything from playbooks, film study and even scheduled notifications of team meetings for tablet utilization. Players can now take their tablets anywhere, making their time off the field much more efficient.


Helmet audio
As helmet design progressed throughout history, some helmets began to infuse technology that changed how teams communicated. In 1994, professional football enacted a policy that would allow for the installation of an in-helmet radio for quarterbacks. The quarterback could now directly receive a play from the team’s offensive coaching staff, making it possible for offenses to no longer rely on archaic hand-signaling to get the right play to the huddle. Helmet audio has had a direct impact on just about every offensive play, and it drastically improved the hurry-up offense, a strategy that’s highly utilized today. No matter which side of the ball (offense or defense), helmet audio changed how teams plan for and execute plays. This has become an effective communication method for 49ers quarterbacks throughout the years, helping them find continued success on the field.
E-ticketing
Mobile technology has transformed the way fans purchase tickets to the game. Mobile technology is precisely what the name states – technology that is portable. It refers to any device that you can carry with you -- cell phones, laptops, in vehicles, etc. -- to perform a wide variety of tasks in various locations.
For decades, fans would need to buy a physical ticket to attend 49ers games and would have to stand in line at a ticket office to pick them up. Now, fans can purchase their tickets online and have their virtual e-tickets scanned on their cell phones at the stadium. An e-ticket, or electronic ticket, is a reservation, as for a seat in a stadium, for which confirmation is granted electronically in place of a printed ticket. At the start of the 2015 season, the 49ers implemented a paperless ticket initiative for fans attending home games at Levi’s® Stadium. Mobile e-tickets are a huge convenience for both 49ers fans and the ticketing centers. Fans no longer have to worry about forgetting a ticket because it can be stored right on their touch phone.

Other examples of technological advancements can be found all throughout the game, in instant replay, artificial turf, and even in how players can recover from injury using new medical technological advancements. As you can see, technology is transforming how 49ers football games are played and viewed by their fans, and will continually be the driving force behind the evolution of the game.
